Hello this is curial from for example dot com and welcome to this 20 second tutorial on algorithmic
trading for beginners and today we're going to be talking about rule based decisions.
If you recall in the previous tutorial we spoke about algorithmic trading systems and how they're called
expert advisors and then kill four wheels to find out how they're structured on the inside what functions
they incorporate and basically how they work from an execution point of view to begin to understand
how like what we will be putting in the body of each of our expert advisors how we will tell the robot
how to correctly understand when to open in order when to close an order and when to take certain actions.
That's basically a rule based decisions.
So rule rule based decisions are a way of analyzing the market and it is the predominant approach to
automated trading systems and basically even most of trading strategies are rule based trades trading
strategies.
It actually it was quite a challenge for me to find out what other types of
strategies or decisions there can be and I have outlined a few.
And I don't know if you'll agree with this if they can be separated into their own clauses but for example
random decisions are not ruled based decisions so when an expert advisor or even a person makes trading
decisions at random that wouldn't involve any rules behind it and then say a self-learning algorithm
like a neural network.
That's a more much more complicated complex expert advisor which learns from its own mistakes and redeveloped
itself in its core it would have rules around how a story develops itself and how it learns from its
own mistakes and from the market etc..
But in general I would probably say that that's not as a rule based decision system or at least it's
not a simple one.
And of course informed decisions.
Those are most definitely not rule based decisions those are just when you have some information when
you know that somebody told you that your dollar is going up or you just have some sort of information
and you don't have any rules around it you just act on it right away.
So but we will be talking about real base decisions and that's how our automated trading systems will
be structured.
And on this slide as you can see I've outlined three main types of rule based decisions which we will
be talking about that is price price rule based decisions time decisions based on time and decisions
based on indicators.
Of course there are other rule based decisions always you can create these things and for example one
of them is funds you can base your rules around how much money you have left or how much money you have
earned.
And that's going more into money management.
But in this course we won't be talking about that.
If you do want to find out more you're welcome to have a look at another course which I'm developing
at the moment and I'll be a bit more advanced or will be the next step from this course or it will also
be an algorithmic trading system.
But you will have much more depth to it.
So let's have a look at for example price base decisions.
Those these decisions involve or these rules involve very very well known domain of the forex trade
market for traders and that is patterns candell patterns so we'll just quickly go to the terminal and
have a look here.
So for example we could have a rule that if if we see a large candell like over.
So this one is 33 pips or from open to close it's 30 pips.
So Frisia a candle over 20 pips.
Then we make a transaction and say for example if the Cannell over 20 pips is bullish scandal so it
going up then we will Celso this case we would all just zoom in a little bit more in this case we would
sell and we could earn maybe around 10 pips or something like that and say if it's if it's a bearish
candle I'm just trying to find one here.
Here is a bearish candle.
We could we could say we buy and in this case would buy and maybe what are its own pips or maybe we'll
lose some money or maybe would go up.
So basically that's a very simple rule based decision.
Now I'll just switch over to candel you so we can better see the candles the white ones are going down
the black ones or the hollow ones are going up say we could have another rule that if if there's a candle
at the top like a fractal like that if if we find a candle that is a turnaround candle then we sell
So for example here we have a candle going up then a candle at the top and then a candle going down.
So here we would sell meaning that would tell us that there was like a turnaround point or something
of that sort.
So basically prices and also prices decision don't only are not only limited to candell formations they're
also they can also involve like price levels.
So here is say we know that well let's have a look somewhere here this should be a price though of 1
3 1 3 6 0 0.
So here we can have a rule for example that if the price goes through this level here if the price breaks
through this resistance line then we sell.
And let's see what would happen.
So if we sold here for example and we waited long enough we could earn like 20 pips.
And so that's another way of setting your price based decisions.
So let's go back to the presentation.
That's that's generally straight forward next step overrule those decisions that I would highlight is
time decisions based on time and they could be as simple as we do in our trade on Fridays and that's
not because Friday is the end of the week and everybody wants to go home and have a rest before or start
the weekend early.
Not at all.
It's it's a very legitimate it's actually a legitimate rule because the non-farm payrolls and unemployment
rates in the U.S. Those are two fundamental pieces of news.
They come out on every first Friday of the month and usually they cause very volatile movements on the
market and you probably don't want to trade during those volatile movements unless you have a specific
goal of trading those to market like those two releases on Market News.
So therefore I generally try to avoid trading on a Friday and post plus also that helps you prove prevents
you from having open positions going over the weekend and possibly getting like being affected by them.
Any gap in the market that can occur on a Monday.
We'll have a look at another example.
So it's not limited to that.
Let's for example look at the British pound dollar chart for a change.
So just switch that off and let's say you look at the charge you can really tell what some.
Is there any time related correlation or time dependencies here.
But if we switch on the period separators which will show us so every period between two periods it
should be 24 candles and that because we were on that is 24 candles and because we were on the one hour
chart that means that each period is one day.
If we look closely and we zoom it like let's actually stay at this level of zoom.
If you look at the start of every day there isn't much movement.
It's the market is generally flat at the start every day.
And the big movements always happen in the middle of the day based on this time zone where the trading
server is located.
And so here again you can see that most of the movements don't start right away in the beginning.
They they do sometimes but statistically they occur in the middle of the day.
So we could have a rule saying that we either do not trade in the middle of the day or on the contrary
we trade in the middle of the day and we look for movements there so we can tell our make trading systems
where system when it should and it shouldn't engage the market.
And finally indicate Well this is a very common one.
This is where we look at different price indicators and we base our decisions on that.
Let's have a look at the quick one.
Moving Averages is Fortune's fine.
I'll just make this a bit
bolder.
So that red line is a 14 bar moving average of the close price and we can have a rule when whenever
the price crosses the moving average then we open a transaction in the direction of the crossing.
So huge sell here.
We basically these are not favorable crossings for us but here for example the crosses and we buy is
another good one this is a basic rule so you would have to add some exceptions or filters to it so you
don't pick up all these noisy signals but say here you could if we buy here and we hold until it actually
crossed again we could earn some pips once once more.
And so that's a rule around indicators.
And those are basically the ones that we intend on working with.
I'm not sure yet how our strategy will play out.
I haven't finalized it yet but we'll we'll see how we go in the next two meals.
And finally I just want to show you a a blueprint of a trading system and this is not our trading system
will be talking about our trading system in the next.
But this is just a.
One of the trading systems that I worked on some time ago and as you can see here it has in it function
Deane it function and the star function without going into detail.
I just wanted to show you the way the rule rules play out so if you take this red sub algorithm here
you can see this these are rhomboids or these weird shapes here.
They ask a question and that is your rule basically that that is where you ask so it doesn't order exist
if an order exists.
Then just to up something if an order doesn't exist then do another check.
And here is the bid price Lesar below the red line.
Then if no then don't just do some updates if the bid price is below the red line then.
Then you open an order.
So basically that's your that's how a rule based decision looks in a trading system blueprint.
And so we'll be.
We will be doing a similar one up but a more simple one for our trading system.
But generally in the code this is where your if else statements go.
So if something then if it's a yes then do that if else.
Alternatively the alternative to if is the else statement.
Operator if so when you say else then that means no and then do this and then again if this you say
yes then do this.
If it's a no so else then do this and that's where that's where the power of the F and L statements
proves itself.
And that's why I mentioned that it's a very important part of this programming language.
MKR for because on the forex market we have to make a lot of decisions and basically our trading systems
are all just full of these decisions when we when it tries to understand what's going on and what it
should do.
And so we'll we'll be seeing much more of those.
So that's that for today.
Basically we have we didn't call it anything just what we were preparing for the next step so we can
flow smoothly through the next Charles and I do hope to see you in our next session.
And until then happy coding.